# Classification of living organisms through deep learning: A model for 18S rRNA sequences classification
Reproducible deep learning and baseline experiments for taxonomic classification of 18S rRNA sequences using the developed model and the QIIME 2’s q2-feature-classifier.

> **Note**: 
*This repository contains only the "prop_0-2/min_10/RandomSplit_0" data split configuration pre-loaded. To generate all data splits for complete experiment, follow the instructions in the **Installation and Environment Setup > 1. Data Pipeline** section.*


## Structure
```
.
├── CNN/                     # Developed deep learning solution and associated experiments
│   ├── models/              # Pre-trained models saved after the experiments
│   ├── results/             # Experimental results
│   │   ├── epochs/          # *Training logs for each experiment (per epoch)
│   │   └── summarized/      # *Summary tables and main performance metrics for batch experiments
│   ├── analysis.ipynb       # Notebook for aggregating batch experiment metrics
│   └── batch_run.ipynb      # Model definition and batch experiment script for running training and testing with multiple configurations
│
├── data/                    # Raw dataset handling and preprocessing
│   ├── PR2/                 # *Folder for the original PR2 dataset
│   ├── data_cleaning.ipynb  # Script for cleaning and filtering the raw dataset
│   └── data_generator.ipynb # Script for generating train/test datasets for the experiments
│
├── feature-classifier/      # Baseline experiments using QIIME 2 q2-feature-classifier
│   ├── analysis.ipynb       # Notebook for aggregating and analyzing baseline experiment metrics
│   └── qiime_script.sh      # Batch experiment workflow using QIIME 2
│
├── new_data/                # *Preprocessed train/test datasets generated by data_generator.ipynb
├── requirements.txt         # Python dependencies for environment setup
└── README.md                # Main project documentation

* Empty folders that will be populated by running the scripts or adding datasets
```

## Technical Details

### Programming Languages
- Python (for deep learning model development, data preprocessing, and result analysis)
- Bash (for QIIME 2 batch execution pipeline)

### Deep Learning Solution
- The proposed model is implemented using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) architecture.
- Model training, testing, and batch experimentation are performed using Jupyter Notebooks located in the `CNN/` directory.

### Baseline Solution
- The reference baseline is the `q2-feature-classifier` plugin from the QIIME 2 platform.
- Baseline experiments are executed via a Bash workflow implemented in `feature-classifier/qiime_script.sh`.

### Data Processing
- Input sequences consist of 18S rRNA gene segments.
- PR2 raw sequence data should be stored in `data/PR2/`.
- Cleaned and filtered datasets are generated using `data/data_cleaning.ipynb`.
- Train/test datasets are generated using `data/data_generator.ipynb` and saved in `new_data/`.

### Experimental Workflow
1. Raw sequence data are cleaned and filtered.
2. Train/test splits are created for all taxonomic ranks with multiple configurations
3. CNN models are trained and evaluated using `CNN/batch_run.ipynb`.
4. QIIME 2 baseline models are trained and evaluated via `feature-classifier/qiime_script.sh`.
5. Aggregated metrics and performance summaries are generated using:
   - `CNN/analysis.ipynb`
   - `feature-classifier/analysis.ipynb`


### Dependencies
- Python 3.10
- All required Python packages listed in `requirements.txt`
- Jupyter Notebook
- QIIME2 2024.10.1, it must be installed separately via Conda according to the official QIIME 2 documentation.
- Compatible PR2 Dataset - Ex.: pr2_version_5.0.0_merged.xlsx
([link](https://github.com/pr2database/pr2database/releases/tag/v5.0.0))


## Installation and Environment Setup

### Operating System
- Linux (Tested with Ubuntu 22.04.4 LTS)

### Python Version
- Python 3.10
- With `pip` and `Jupyter Notebook`

### For Python Dependencies Installation
Run: 
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### For QIIME 2 Installation
Please, follow the official documentation from https://qiime2.org/

## How to Run the Experiments / Reproducibility
This section describes the complete workflow to reproduce the experiments, including data preprocessing, baseline experiments using QIIME 2’s q2-feature-classifier, and deep learning model training and evaluation.



### Reproducibility Notes
- All experiments were executed using fixed train/test splits generated by ./data/data_generator.ipynb.
- Random seeds (0, 14, 56, 92, 84, 101, 105, 227) are defined within the data_generator notebook.
- Full experimental reproducibility requires using the same software versions specified above.

---

### 1. Data Pipeline
The data pipeline prepares the raw 18S rRNA sequences for both the deep learning model and the QIIME 2 baseline.

#### Step 1: Add the Raw Dataset
Place the original PR2 dataset into:
```bash
./data/PR2/
```
Note: For the experiments, the "pr2_version_5.0.0_merged" PR2 dataset was used. It can be downloaded in the official PR2 website and official [PR2 GitHub](https://github.com/pr2database/pr2database/releases/tag/v5.0.0) .

#### Step 2: Clean and Filter the Raw Data
Run the following notebook to clean and filter the raw sequences:
```bash
jupyter notebook data/data_cleaning.ipynb
```

#### Step 3: Generate Train/Test Datasets
Generate the train/test dataset combinations used for all experiments:
```bash
jupyter notebook data/data_generator.ipynb
```
The split datasets are saved in `./new_data/` folder.

### 2. Baseline Experiments (QIIME 2 q2-feature-classifier)
Baseline experiments are conducted using the QIIME 2 q2-feature-classifier plugin and the prepared datasets in `new_data/`

#### Step 1: Activate the QIIME 2 Environment
Activate the environment created following the official QIIME 2 documentation.

For example: 
```bash
conda activate qiime2-2024.10.1
```

#### Step 2: Run Batch Baseline Experiments
Execute the baseline workflow:
```bash
bash feature-classifier/qiime_script.sh
```
This script performs:
- Feature classifier training
- Taxonomic classification

#### Step 3: Analyze Baseline Results
Aggregate baseline results using:
```bash
jupyter notebook feature-classifier/analysis.ipynb
```

This notebook will generate `FeatureClassifier_results.csv` file with the aggregated results

### 3. Deep Learning Solution Experiments
Deep learning solution experiments are performed using the prepared datasets in `new_data/`.

#### Step 1: Run CNN Batch Experiments
Launch the batch training and evaluation notebook:
```bash
jupyter notebook CNN/batch_run.ipynb
```

This notebook:
- Defines the deep learning model architecture
- Trains models using multiple hyperparameter configurations
- Evaluates model performance on the test sets

Notes:
- Trained models are saved in: `CNN/models/`
- Training/testing epochs logs are saved in: `CNN/results/epochs/`
- Summarized results logs are saved in: `CNN/results/summarized`

#### Step 2: Analyze Deep Learning Solution Results
The aggregated performance metrics can be visualized running the script:
```bash 
jupyter notebook CNN/analysis.ipynb
```



